A Large-Scale Phenomenological Model of Activity in Primate Area MT

Omid Rezai and Bryan Tripp

One of the major barriers to modelling the primate visual cortex is the complexity of the network. Each visual area receives input from many other areas. It is therefore difficult to model any subnetwork without ignoring most of its inputs. One possible way to mitigate this problem is to develop phenomenological models of these inputs, i.e. stand-alone, phenomenological models of various visual areas that produce realistic spike patterns. Such models can then be used as inputs to more physiologically detailed models of other areas. We are developing such a phenomenological model of primate area MT. We hope to use this model in the future, as input to mechanistic models of the other areas to which MT projects (e.g. V1, V2, V4, TEO, DP, etc.; see [1]) 

Our model consists of topographically organized units with lateral interactions [2], which are driven by linear kernels that combine input from several fields. The fields include motion, binocular disparity, contrast, and attention. Some of these (e.g. contrast) can be computed fairly directly from video input. Others (e.g. motion and disparity) are estimated using more sophisticated methods from computer vision. Finally, the attention field is manually defined in each frame of the input videos. (In future work, it may be possible to compute the attention field from a combination of bottom-up cues and task parameters.) These methods produce time-varying spike rates, which we convert to spike trains using a Poisson model with correlations. 

We developed the model structure and estimated distributions of model parameters using data from the electrophysiology literature. The figure illustrates the model’s fits to a variety of tuning curves. Each physical location in MT is associated with a probability density function over the model parameters. This allows us to generate a realistic random model of any size, e.g. with a realistic number of neurons, or with a smaller number to meet computational constraints. We have driven the model with laboratory stimuli (e.g. gratings; random dots), and also with natural stereo videos from the computer vision community [2]. 

Our approach is data-driven, in that we simply try to produce statistically realistic spike trains without making any assumptions about mechanisms. On the other hand, it is necessary to extrapolate beyond published data in order for the whole MT model population to respond to a variety of stimuli. 

1. Markov, N. T., Ercsey-Ravasz, M. M., Ribeiro Gomes, a R., Lamy, C., Magrou, L., Vezoli, J., … Kennedy, H. (2014). Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 24(1), 17–36. 
2. Geiger, A., Lenz, P., & Urtasun, R. (2012). Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 3354–3361. 
3. Pack, C. C., & Born, R. T. (2001). Nature, 409(6823), 1040–2. 
